+++
title = '10 properties of highly effective projects'
date = 2025-10-22T14:38:10+01:00
+++


Context matters but a successful project should have the following (note that this is not an exhaustive list):

### People

The important thing to remember is that IT projects rarely flounder because of the technology.
The problem is generally the wrong people in the wrong positions.

1. __Hire good developers__

This is a really important one so why is it relatively rare? 
Well, partly because hiring managers generally don't know what a good developer looks like and partly because good developers are expensive.

Good developers can generally spot each other so have your best devs lead the interview process.

Good devs also tend to be expensive so our advice is to hire __fewer but better__ developers.
You'll also reduce communication overhead which is a huge productivity killer.

2. __Eat your own dog food__

If the people building the product are not the people maintaining it, guess what? 
They'll build a product where maintenance is not the most important property and instead prioritise getting a product out the door.
That's just human nature. 
This was rampant in the outsourcing craze of the early 2000s. 
These days, staff are generally __embedded__ in the development team if work is outsourced to a third party. 


3. __Quality requirements__ 

Work tickets need:
- to be first approved by the people implementing them
- to be as accurate as possible
- to have acceptance criteria that define what 'done' means.

There's often horse trading between the implementers and the business when agreeing on what exactly a ticket includes. 
So, in this most human of tech processes, emotional safety is key.

4. __Emotional safety__

Steve Jobs once [said](https://www.goodreads.com/quotes/8586131-it-doesn-t-make-sense-to-hire-smart-people-and-then):  "It doesn't make sense to hire smart people and then tell them what to do. We hire smart people so they can tell us what to do."

Upper management need to listen to the troops.
It takes more than one-off away days to facilitate this. 
Instead there must be regular stakeholder involvement, preferably daily. 
A lot of __Agile practices__ advocate this so if you're not employing at least some of these principles (retrospective, sprint planning etc), you really should.

5. __Say 'no' to silos__

'Scrum master' is a role not a job.

'DevOps' is a discipline not a team.

The more you silo people, the more corner cases will slip through the cracks. 

6. __Regular back-and-forth__

Show-and-tells, burn down charts, retrospectives - these are all ways to ensure people are aligned. There should never be any surprises in the timelines if __communication__ is done properly.


### Process

1. __Automated regression tests__

You'll be hard pressed to find an open source project without __continuous integration__ but I still see some in industry.
Regression tests are the single best way to ensure a code base is resilient.

2. __Logging__

Good logging is the key to effective maintenance.
It's also the first thing to be neglected if the devs are not the maintainers (see "Eat your own dog food").

3. __Fail fast__

Don't be scared to experiment. It often takes less time to try something than to have a series of meetings about it. If it fails, great, you learned something. In Agile methodologies, this is called a spike.  

4. __Documentation__

It's rare in a busy organisation for somebody to go back to tech documentation and update it.
You just have to accept that in most cases, devs don't have the time and professional documenters rarely have the low level insight.
However, documentation can be generated by the test suite (see above).
If you want to know more, search for __Behaviour Driven Development__ and see how many free tools keep both code and docs in lock-step.
